content added (#2)
jcolomb/gintonic-blog: text/survey_analysis_report2.md

it is therefore preferable to keep these different file types in different folders.
In addition, code should be reusable on different datasets,
it makes therefore sense to be able to share it independently of the data.
And finally, it is easy to make code read data present in a different folder and there is no technical reason to keep data and code together.
We will therefore keep an organization where the first level separate data and code.
However, we want to implement a different solution that creates new folders in the different first level folders, for each new experiment. 

# Gin-tonic solution

The gin tonic application (thats brings tonic vigor to the g-node infrastructure gin) is still in development, 
but will implement the different steps we presented above.
It relies on the git, git annex, and git submodule technologies. 
In gin-tonic, sub-folders can be submodules,
meaning they can be synchronised, shared and published independently of the other sub-folders,
while looking completely normal on one's computer.
A mockup presentation for a lab with 2 projects is available at https://gin.g-node.org/testorga.

> ![Fig.4: Folder structure developed after analysing the survey.](../50_figures/foldertree_Screenshots/foldertree.png)

Reviewer: Come to think of it: I would like to modify the structure a bit:

1. I prefer the folder `02` having a name like `materials_and_methods` only because it is the way it appears on the article.
2. Is it also possible to create the `related_works` folder between `project_management` and `materials_and_methods` folders? Normally I don't see it in most journal articles, but it would help managing papers related to the project.

Author: what would be related work ? you mean pdfs of paper you are reading/refering to for that project ?

Reviewer: Yes, PDFs, list of references, notes on how they are related to the project etc.

Author: We could have a subfolder in the project management one ? I am not sure about the name, as related work is not instinctive (could mean related work one is doing, not external stuff),
Any other suggestion?

> ![Fig.4: Folder structure developed after analysing the survey.](../50_figures/foldertree_Screenshots/foldertree.png)

Reviewer: Another point on the image: the use of "labels" for pointing specific directories does not seem to work.
Can you make rectangles overlaid on the folder entry (i.e. the space that includes both the icon and the name)?

---

> title: "A folder structure to organise files in a reserch project"

Reviewer 2: Is the term 'folder structure' correct? I think, the term 'directory structure' is used more often. So I propose: "A collaborative directory structure for organizing files within a research project"

Author: I think "directory structure" sounds more technical, and is used more often in computer science, I would keep folder structure here, as we are aiming at a larger audience. TBD

> title: "A folder structure to organise files in a reserch project"

Author: ```suggestion
title: "Towards a standardized research folder structure."
```

bibliography:  "GIN-tonic-paper-zotero.bib"
author:
  - Julien Colomb
  - The Gin-tonic team
output: 
  bookdown::html_document2:
    keep_md: true

---

![titleimage: Some positive feedback received in the survey.](../50_figures/pulication_ready_figures/blogtitle.jpeg)

# Summary

> In contrast to software developers, researchers have no standard way to organise their files.

Reviewer 2: In contrast to software developers, researchers mostly do not organize their files according to some common standard.

> In contrast to software developers, researchers have no standard way to organise their files.

Author: ```suggestion
In contrast to software developers, researchers mostly do not organize their files according to some common standard.
```

> While data managers recommend to design such an organisation,

Reviewer 2: While data managers propose to design and follow such an organisation,

> While data managers recommend to design such an organisation,

Author: ```suggestion
While data managers propose to design and follow such an organisation,
```

they fail at providing clear recommendations or examples;

> and there is no time allocated to this task in the researcher work.

Reviewer 2: and there is no time specifically assigned to this task in the researcher's work.

> and there is no time allocated to this task in the researcher work.

Author: ```suggestion
and there is no time specifically assigned to this task in the researcher's work.
```

> We believe that providing researcher with a folder tree structure template could make a huge difference in promoting data management and research collaboration.

Reviewer 2: @tarendt	Reply…
We believe that providing researchers with a commonly accepted folder tree structure template could make a huge difference in promoting data management and research collaboration.

> We believe that providing researcher with a folder tree structure template could make a huge difference in promoting data management and research collaboration.

Author: ```suggestion
We believe that providing researchers with a commonly accepted folder tree structure template could make a huge difference in promoting data management and research collaboration.
```

> Here we present the results of an initial survey run in three neuroscience research consortium (LINK).

Reviewer 2: In this blog, we present the results of an initial survey run in three neuroscientific research consortia (LINK).

> Here we present the results of an initial survey run in three neuroscience research consortium (LINK).

Author: In this blog, we present the results of an initial survey run in three neuroscientific research consortia (LINK).

> Here we present the results of an initial survey run in three neuroscience research consortium (LINK).

Author: ```suggestion
In this blog, we present the results of an initial survey run in three neuroscientific research consortia (LINK).
```

> We collected the feedback from 51 neuroscientists presented with 2 initial drafts,

Reviewer 2: We collected the feedback from 51 neuroscientists presented with two initial template drafts,

> We collected the feedback from 51 neuroscientists presented with 2 initial drafts,

Author: ```suggestion
We collected the feedback from 51 neuroscientists presented with two initial template drafts,
```

analysed their responses,

> and build a second template draft based on this feedback that is presented here.

Reviewer 2: and built an updated template based on the feedback that is presented here.

> and build a second template draft based on this feedback that is presented here.

Author: ```suggestion
and built an updated template based on the feedback that is presented here.
```

> This new template takes three levels of data organisation into account (experiment, project, laboratory),

Reviewer 2: This new template takes three levels of data organisation into account (laboratory, project, and experiment),

> This new template takes three levels of data organisation into account (experiment, project, laboratory),

Author: ```suggestion
This new template takes three levels of data organisation into account (laboratory, project, and experiment),
```

> while staying relatively simple and flexible, especially when implemented it in a git workflow (using the GIN-tonic tool we are developing).

Reviewer 2: while staying fairly simple and flexible, especially when implemented it in a git workflow (using the GIN-tonic tool we are developing).

> while staying relatively simple and flexible, especially when implemented it in a git workflow (using the GIN-tonic tool we are developing).

Author: ```suggestion
while staying fairly simple and flexible, especially when implemented it in a git workflow (using the GIN-tonic tool we are developing).
```

Researchers from all research domains are now invited to review this draft in a second survey (run until mid January 2021, LINK).  

# Introduction

> Researchers spend time every day doing file management on their computers (creating, downloading, naming,  moving,  saving,  copying,  reviewing,  navigating, searching for, sharing, and deleting files and folders).

Reviewer 2: Every day, researchers spend time doing file management on their computers (creating, downloading, naming,  moving,  saving,  copying,  reviewing,  navigating, searching for, sharing, and deleting files and folders).

> Researchers spend time every day doing file management on their computers (creating, downloading, naming,  moving,  saving,  copying,  reviewing,  navigating, searching for, sharing, and deleting files and folders).

Reviewer 2: Every day, researchers spend time doing file management on their computers (creating, downloading, naming,  moving,  saving,  copying,  reviewing,  navigating, searching for, sharing, and deleting files and folders).

> Researchers spend time every day doing file management on their computers (creating, downloading, naming,  moving,  saving,  copying,  reviewing,  navigating, searching for, sharing, and deleting files and folders).

Author: ```suggestion
Every day, researchers spend time doing file management on their computers (creating, downloading, naming, moving, saving, copying, reviewing, navigating, searching for, sharing, and deleting files and folders).
```

> While many different initiatives and tools tried to improve file management (using tags, databases and search algorithms), the use of folder tree structure appeared to be unavoidable [@dinneenUbiquitousDigitalFile2020]. 

Reviewer 2: While many different initiatives and tools tried to improve file management (using tags, databases and search algorithms), the use of folder tree structure appeared to be unavoidable and necessary [@dinneenUbiquitousDigitalFile2020].

> While many different initiatives and tools tried to improve file management (using tags, databases and search algorithms), the use of folder tree structure appeared to be unavoidable [@dinneenUbiquitousDigitalFile2020]. 

Author: ```suggestion
While many different initiatives and tools tried to improve file management (using tags, databases and search algorithms), the use of folder tree structure appeared to be unavoidable and necessary [@dinneenUbiquitousDigitalFile2020].
```

> While both reproducible research and data management advocates and experts are advising researchers to design a folder organisation structure ([@LibraryCarpentryLcfairresearch2019], [@theturingwaycommunityTuringWayHandbook2019]),

Reviewer 2: In addition, both proponents of reproducible research and data management experts recommend researchers use an appropriate folder organizational structure.

> While both reproducible research and data management advocates and experts are advising researchers to design a folder organisation structure ([@LibraryCarpentryLcfairresearch2019], [@theturingwaycommunityTuringWayHandbook2019]),

Author: ```suggestion
In addition, both proponents of reproducible research and data management experts recommend researchers the use of an appropriate folder organizational structure ([@LibraryCarpentryLcfairresearch2019], [@theturingwaycommunityTuringWayHandbook2019]).
```

> only few actually provide examples or attempt to homogenize the structure (but see [@vuorreSharingOrganizingResearch2020] and [@wilsonGoodEnoughPractices2017] for exceptions).

Reviewer 2: However, only few actually provide examples or attempts to homogenize such a structure (see [@vuorreSharingOrganizingResearch2020] and [@wilsonGoodEnoughPractices2017] for exceptions).

> only few actually provide examples or attempt to homogenize the structure (but see [@vuorreSharingOrganizingResearch2020] and [@wilsonGoodEnoughPractices2017] for exceptions).

Author: ```suggestion
However, only few actually provide examples or attempts to homogenize such a structure (see [@vuorreSharingOrganizingResearch2020] and [@wilsonGoodEnoughPractices2017] for exceptions).
```

> However, only few actually provide examples or attempts to homogenize such a structure (see [@vuorreSharingOrganizingResearch2020] and [@wilsonGoodEnoughPractices2017] for exceptions).

Reviewer: Is the word "to homogenize" common in the field? Can it be reworded to be one of:
- standardize
- disperse
- spread

Author: What about "make uniform" and what is wrong with homogenize in your opinion ?

> We are data managers of different institutions working with neurobiologists, and we teamed up with the NFDI-neuro community to develop a new strategy to help researchers with their data management. 

Reviewer 2: We -the authors of this blog post- are data managers of different institutions working with neurobiologists, and we teamed up with the NFDI Neuroscience community to develop a new strategy to support researchers with their data management.

> We are data managers of different institutions working with neurobiologists, and we teamed up with the NFDI-neuro community to develop a new strategy to help researchers with their data management. 

Author: ```suggestion
We -the authors of this blog post- are data managers of different institutions working with neurobiologists, and we teamed up with the NFDI Neuroscience community to develop a new strategy to support researchers with their data management.
```

> We hypothesize that implementing a folder tree structure using a template could help researchers collaborate on their projects,

Reviewer 2: We hypothesize that implementing a hierarchical directory structure using a template could help researchers collaborate on their projects, and manage their data and files better.

> We hypothesize that implementing a folder tree structure using a template could help researchers collaborate on their projects,

Reviewer 2: We hypothesize that implementing a hierarchical directory structure using a template could help researchers collaborate on their projects, and manage their data and files better.

> We hypothesize that implementing a folder tree structure using a template could help researchers collaborate on their projects,

Reviewer 2: We hypothesize that implementing a hierarchical directory structure using a template could help researchers collaborate on their projects,

> We hypothesize that implementing a folder tree structure using a template could help researchers collaborate on their projects,

Author: ```suggestion
We hypothesize that implementing a hierarchical directory structure using a template could help researchers collaborate on their projects,
```

and manage their data and files better.
In a first step, 

> we designed two templates (fig. 1) and a survey to guide our efforts.

Reviewer 2: we designed two templates (see Fig. 1) and a survey to guide our efforts.

> we designed two templates (fig. 1) and a survey to guide our efforts.

Author: ```suggestion
we designed two templates (see Fig. 1) and a survey to guide our efforts.
```

> We are presenting here the analysis of the survey answer and a novel version of the template in accordance with the received feedback.

Reviewer 2: Here, we are presenting the analysis of the survey answers and a novel version of the template according to the received feedback.

> We are presenting here the analysis of the survey answer and a novel version of the template in accordance with the received feedback.

Author: ```suggestion
Here, we are presenting the analysis of the survey answers and a novel version of the template according to the received feedback.
```

> This blog ends by outlining the gin-tonic application, that brings some technical solution (based on the git submodule technology) to add flexibility and ease of use in the template. 

Reviewer 2: The blog ends by outlining the GIN-tonic application, that brings some technical solution (based on the git submodule technology) to add flexibility and ease of use in the template.

> This blog ends by outlining the gin-tonic application, that brings some technical solution (based on the git submodule technology) to add flexibility and ease of use in the template. 

Author: ```suggestion
The blog ends by outlining the GIN-tonic application, that brings some technical solution (based on the git submodule technology) to add flexibility and ease of use in the template.
```

> *How do you organise your digital files for your research projects ?* 
>

> > I organise my file using the GIN research repository (version 1).

Reviewer 2: I am not sure what this part is...

Author: good points I was thinking about making an image for this, and failed to do it.

# The survey

> ## Two template structure

Reviewer 2: ## Two template structures

In order to obtain a practical flair in comments and feedback received,

> we provided two templates, with a similar number of folders,

Reviewer 2: we provided two templates, both having a similar number of folders

> we provided two templates, with a similar number of folders,

Author: ```suggestion
we provided two templates, both having a similar number of folders,
```

> ## Two template structure

Author: ```suggestion
## Two template structures
```

but organized differently.

> The 5_top structure was more hierarchical,

Reviewer 2: The 5_top template represented a more hierarchical structure,

> The 5_top structure was more hierarchical,

Author: ```suggestion
The 5_top template represented a more hierarchical structure,
```

> while the 9_top structure was flatter (Fig. 1).

Reviewer 2: while the 9_top template represented a more flat structure ( see Fig. 1).

> while the 9_top structure was flatter (Fig. 1).

Author: ```suggestion
while the 9_top template represented a more flat structure (see Fig. 1).
```

> In addition, we asked researchers to browse the folder tree while asking them to place or find specific files,

Reviewer 2: Then, we asked researchers to browse the folder tree while asking them to place or find specific files,

> In addition, we asked researchers to browse the folder tree while asking them to place or find specific files,

Author: ```suggestion
Then, we asked researchers to browse the folder tree while asking them to place or find specific files,
```

hoping researchers will make themselves familiar with the template before giving us a detailed feedback. 

![Fig 1: the two templates structure](../50_figures/pulication_ready_figures/2draft-templates.png)

## No clear preference for one or the other template. 

> We got 51 responses to our survey.

Reviewer 2: We ran the survey on the three involved CRCs during autumn 2020 and finally got 51 responses.

> We got 51 responses to our survey.

Author: ```suggestion
We ran the survey on the three involved CRCs during autumn 2020 and finally got 51 responses.
```

> We prepared an analysis before the data collection and finally run it on the final data to produce a reproducible reports you can access here: XXX.

Reviewer 2: In the meantime, we prepared the analysis and finally run it on the final data to produce a reproducible report you can access here: XXX.

> We prepared an analysis before the data collection and finally run it on the final data to produce a reproducible reports you can access here: XXX.

Author: ```suggestion
In the meantime, we prepared the analysis and finally run it on the final data to produce a reproducible report you can access here: XXX.
```

In general, researchers reacted very positively to the project.

> Surprisingly, about half of the participants preferred one template, while the other half preferred the other one (Fig.2, 

Reviewer 2: Surprisingly, about half of the participants preferred one template, while the other half preferred the other one (see Fig. 2,

> Surprisingly, about half of the participants preferred one template, while the other half preferred the other one (Fig.2, 

Author: ```suggestion
Surprisingly, about half of the participants preferred one template, while the other half preferred the other one (see Fig. 2,
```

participants had to choose one or the other template).

> This preference  was highly correlated with the similarity of the template with the structure they were presently using (Pearson Chi-square, p−value = 2.23e−06),

Reviewer 2: This preference  was highly correlated with the similarity of the template to the structure they presently use (Pearson Chi-square, p−value = 2.23e−06).

> This preference  was highly correlated with the similarity of the template with the structure they were presently using (Pearson Chi-square, p−value = 2.23e−06),

Author: ```suggestion
This preference was highly correlated with the similarity of the template to the structure they presently use (Pearson Chi-square, p−value = 2.23e−06).
```

> while we could see no visible effect of career stage or research domain on this preference,

Reviewer 2: However, we could not identify any notable effect of career stage or research domain on this preference,

> while we could see no visible effect of career stage or research domain on this preference,

Author: ```suggestion
However, we could not identify any notable effect of career stage or research domain on this preference,
```

or any effect of this preference on willingness to use such a template.

> In particular, computer scientists seem not to differ from wet-lab researchers in these aspects.

Reviewer 2: In particular, computer scientists do not seem to differ from wet-lab researchers in these aspects.

> In particular, computer scientists seem not to differ from wet-lab researchers in these aspects.

Author: ```suggestion
In particular, computer scientists do not seem to differ from wet-lab researchers in these aspects.
```

![Fig. 2: Wilingness to use a template, split by preference for one template.](../50_figures/pulication_ready_figures/fig2.png)

We asked three questions about where they would save or search for specific documents in the different structures.
Researchers were indicating different folders between them, and different than the ones we designed for it,

> showing that **a too detailed folder structure would not be helpful**.

Reviewer 2: showing that **a too detailed folder structure seems to be rather helpful**.

> showing that **a too detailed folder structure would not be helpful**.

Author: ```suggestion
showing that **a too detailed folder structure seems to be rather inconvenient*.
```

Author: rather helpless

On the other hand, researchers would navigate the repository to find specific files using similar strategies (Fig. 3),

> suggesting that having a structure can be helpful, and reduce the time to browse for specific information.   

Reviewer 2: suggesting that having a structure can be helpful, and may reduce the time to browse for specific information.

> suggesting that having a structure can be helpful, and reduce the time to browse for specific information.   

Author: ```suggestion
suggesting that having a structure can be helpful, and may reduce the time to browse for specific information.
```

> ![Fig.3: Folder researchers would search for information about "blindness" status of the experiment design. Rank1 line shows that most people would look first in the main readme file or the preregistration folder.](../50_figures/pulication_ready_figures/fig3.png)

Reviewer 2: I still have a problem to understand this figure right ...

## Issues

Most participants could see the advantage of such an homogenization of the project management for their own work, but were critical about the **cost/benefit ratio** of such a process, especially for ongoing projects.

> Many mentioned that it would only reach full impact if the <whole lab> would be using it, emphasizing the advantage of such a system for 

Reviewer 2: Many mentioned that it would only reach full impact if the _whole lab_ would be using it, emphasizing the advantage of such a system for

> Many mentioned that it would only reach full impact if the <whole lab> would be using it, emphasizing the advantage of such a system for 

Author: ```suggestion
Many mentioned that it would only reach full impact if the whole lab would be using it, emphasizing the advantage of such a system for
```

> Most participants could see the advantage of such an homogenization of the project management for their own work, but were critical about the **cost/benefit ratio** of such a process, especially for ongoing projects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most participants could see the advantage of having a standardized structure for their project files in their own work, but were critical about the **cost/benefit ratio** of such a process, especially for ongoing projects.
```

collaborative work.
In addition, they mentioned the time saved by not having to create a template for themselves,
but only use an existing standard.
While they were quite unanimous about using a template for new projects, they were critical about making a transition for ongoing projects,
as the cost of transition might be too high.
More generally, they were questioning the cost over benefit ratio of changing their current organization system,

> especially as learning a new workflow can take time.

Reviewer 2: especially as learning a new workflow takes time.

> especially as learning a new workflow can take time.

Author: ```suggestion
especially as learning a new workflow takes time.
```

In many cases, people mentioned that the **files are organized via experiments**, not at the project level.
In particular, people tend to pool data and code in a single experiment folder.
This is reminiscent of the two example structure given in the library carpentry course [@LibraryCarpentryLcfairresearch2019].

On the other hand, some **files are organised outside of project folders**, i.e.  in particular places irrespective of the project they belong to. 
Many researchers reported having a folder for all conferences reports or all manuscritps, for instance.

# The new template

> Data management principles recommend to keep all files related to a project in a single folder (it facilitates sharing of these files with the whole team working on the project), 

Reviewer 2: Data management principles recommend to keep all files related to a project in a single folder (this facilitates sharing of these files with the whole team working on the project),

> Data management principles recommend to keep all files related to a project in a single folder (it facilitates sharing of these files with the whole team working on the project), 

Author: ```suggestion
Data management principles recommend to keep all files related to a project in a single folder (this facilitates sharing of these files with the whole team working on the project),
```

> and to manage data and code differently (it allows different version control system, as well as sharing and reusing data and code independently). 

Reviewer 2: and to manage data and code differently (this allows different version control system, as well as sharing and reusing data and code independently).

> and to manage data and code differently (it allows different version control system, as well as sharing and reusing data and code independently). 

Author: ```suggestion
and to manage data and code differently (this allows different version control system, as well as sharing and reusing data and code independently).
```

> Data management principles recommend to keep all files related to a project in a single folder (this facilitates sharing of these files with the whole team working on the project),
> and to manage data and code differently (this allows different version control system, as well as sharing and reusing data and code independently).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Data management principles recommend (1) to keep all files related to a project in a single folder (this facilitates sharing of these files with the whole team working on the project),
and (2) to manage data and code differently (this allows different version control system, as well as independent sharing and reusing, of data and code).
```

We designed a template that follows these principles, 
but added some recommendations and technical solutions 

> in order to permit users to have cross-project and experiment-level organisations of their files.

Reviewer: The definitions of "projects" and "experiments" sound unclear to me.
Weren't there some images, or a list of definitions, about what is a project, and what is an experiment?
I think it would be better to make it clear about the terminology here.

Author: very good feedback, I will look at the whole text to indeed get a definition of these terms (or an attempt at a definition).

## The experiment level

We propose to keep data and code in different first level folder, 
and to create several new folders (in the different first level folders) for each new experiment. 
This could be easily automated in your language of choice,

> and we are working on bringing this functionality to gin-tonic (see below). 

Reviewer 2: and we are working on bringing this functionality to GIN-tonic (see below).

> and we are working on bringing this functionality to gin-tonic (see below). 

Author: ```suggestion
and we are working on bringing this functionality to GIN-tonic (see below).
```

> In addition some of these new folders could also have their own templates. 

Reviewer 2: In addition, some of these new folders could also have their own templates.

> In addition some of these new folders could also have their own templates. 

Author: ```suggestion
In addition, some of these new folders could also have their own templates.
```

> and to create several new folders (in the different first level folders) for each new experiment. 

Reviewer: What it is supposed to look like is unclear to me ("several new folders for each new experiment"). Can you add reference to a panel that describes what it means?

Author: I will redo fig 4 to include this

> For instance, you could use a specific BIDS template for some experiments, while others will use a different template.

Reviewer 2: For instance, you could use a specific BIDS standard template for some imaging experiments, while others will use a different template.

> For instance, you could use a specific BIDS template for some experiments, while others will use a different template.

Author: ```suggestion
For instance, you could use a specific BIDS standard template for some imaging experiments, while others will use a different template.
```

Author: BIDS is not only for imaging nowadays ?

> and we are working on bringing this functionality to GIN-tonic (see below).

Reviewer: Aren't these "automation"-related topics discussed later, and separately, below, in the GIN-tonic section?

Author: Would you suggest to have one part of the blog on automation independent of the description of tonic ?

Author: I see you did, and I will follow the advice, thanks

## The project and cross-project level

> We propose to mirror some folders (for shared figures, report and conference, and manuscripts) both in the project folder and in a different folder (fig. 4). 

Reviewer 2: We propose to mirror some folders (for shared figures, report and conference, and manuscripts) both in the project folder and in a different folder (see Fig. 4).

> We propose to mirror some folders (for shared figures, report and conference, and manuscripts) both in the project folder and in a different folder (fig. 4). 

Author: ```suggestion
We propose to mirror some folders (for shared figures, report and conference, and manuscripts) both in the project folder and in a different folder (see Fig. 4).
```

> In addition, we would propose to add a `labcommons` folder that could be shared and synchronised between all lab members using cloud technologies. 

Reviewer 2: In addition, we propose to add a `labcommons` folder that could be shared and synchronised between all lab members using DropBox-like cloud technologies.

> In addition, we would propose to add a `labcommons` folder that could be shared and synchronised between all lab members using cloud technologies. 

Author: ```suggestion
In addition, we propose to add a `labcommons` folder that could be shared and synchronised between all lab members using DropBox-like cloud technologies.
```

> This will be quite difficult to set manually (using alias folders for example), but using git submodule technology in gin tonic, it can be automated (see below).

Reviewer 2: This all will be quite difficult to set up manually (using alias folders for example), but using the git submodule technology in GIN-tonic, it can be automated (see below).

> This will be quite difficult to set manually (using alias folders for example), but using git submodule technology in gin tonic, it can be automated (see below).

Author: ```suggestion
This all will be quite difficult to set up manually (using alias folders for example), but using the git submodule technology in GIN-tonic, it can be automated (see below).
```

> This all will be quite difficult to set up manually (using alias folders for example), but using the git submodule technology in GIN-tonic, it can be automated (see below).

Reviewer: Same as the comment above: aren't these "automation"-related topics discussed later, and separately, below, in the GIN-tonic section?

![Fig.4: Folder structure developed after analysing the survey. The purple point and arrows indicates that these folders are mirrored in different folder structures (using the gi submodule technology). One can for instance access (and update) the same files looking in the project manuscript folder, or by navigating to the manuscripts folder, and then to the project. For each experiments, additional folders will be created automatically in different folders.](../50_figures/pulication_ready_figures/fig4.png)

> # Gin-tonic implementation

Author: ```suggestion

# Automated project management: Gin-tonic

The major challenge in sharing a common project structure is about maintaining the individual project repositories to be well-formed. As the project develops, the common structure can become easily broken by researchers adding ad hoc temporally folders, without knowing where the files should belong to. It takes lots of time and effort, from both researchers and data curators alike, to remember and follow the rules in individual specific cases of adding files and folders.

To alleviate the cost of maintaining the project structure, here we propose an automated way of managing the development of project.

```

> # Gin-tonic implementation

Reviewer 2: # GIN-tonic implementation

> # Gin-tonic implementation

Author: ```suggestion
# GIN-tonic implementation
```

> GIN is the g-node infrastructure, which brings similar functionalities as gitlab or github, based on git and git annex technologies.

Reviewer 2: GIN is the G-Node infrastructure, which brings similar functionalities as GitLab or GitHub, based on git and git annex technologies.

> GIN is the g-node infrastructure, which brings similar functionalities as gitlab or github, based on git and git annex technologies.

Author: ```suggestion
GIN is the G-Node infrastructure, which brings similar functionalities as GitLab or GitHub, based on git and git annex technologies.
```

> # GIN-tonic implementation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Automated project management using GIN-tonic

(and why it is important to automate it)
```

This topic seems to come out of nowhere, as we have been talking about the template folder-structure.
I think it would be better to explicitly state:

- This section is about automation of folder-structure management.
- Why it has to be automated / how it is important to be automated.
- How (relatively) easy it is to automate it.

Author: I agree that it might be much better this way, will rewrite.

We are building a `go` extension that will facilitate some administrative tasks and automate some complex workflow linked to the use of the template.
We could not resist calling it tonic, in reference to the vigor added to the GIN tool.
In gin-tonic, sub-folders can be submodules,
meaning they can be synchronised, shared and published independently of the other sub-folders,
while looking completely normal on one's computer.
A mock-up presentation for a lab with 2 projects is available at https://gin.g-node.org/testorga.

> The tonic application will create a new project repository,

Reviewer 2: The tonic application creates a new project repository,

> The tonic application will create a new project repository,

Author: ```suggestion
The tonic application creates a new project repository,
```

> which will follow the research repository template with some folders being created as submodules (fig. 4). These submodules are also added to some lab-level repository.

Reviewer 2: following the discussed research repository template with some folders being created as submodules (see Fig. 4). These submodules are also added to some lab-level repository

> which will follow the research repository template with some folders being created as submodules (fig. 4). These submodules are also added to some lab-level repository.

Author: ```suggestion
following the discussed research repository template with some folders being created as submodules (see Fig. 4). These submodules are also added to some lab-level repository
```

> In addition, a labcommons folder that contains files relevant for the whole lab will be added to all projects.

Reviewer 2: In addition, a `labcommons` folder that contains files relevant for the whole lab will be added to all projects.

Author: no difference here ?

This means that for example a manuscript draft can be available at two location on ones computer, once inside a clone (cloning is similar to downloading but while keeping a link with the server version) of the project repository, and once inside a clone of the lab-level manuscript repository. Changes in either places can be synchronised to the unique version available on the server.

> 

Reviewer 2: This might be confusing. Is this really an advantage/feature?

Author: Make more sense if one talk of 2 people accessing the same data in different ways (indeed), will modify.

Author: also add note on access rights.

> On the other hand, the tonic application will also be able to add submodules and folders to the parent repository for each experiment performed. A data submodule will be created, so that the data can be curated and published independently of the other experiments, while other folders will be created (). A synchronisation of the computer version will then bring these changes on the local version, ready to be filled with data, code, and figures.

Reviewer 2: On the other hand, the tonic application will also be able to add submodules and folders to the parent repository for each experiment performed. A `data` submodule will be created, so that the data can be curated and published independently of the other experiments, while other folders will be created (). A synchronisation of the computer version will then bring these changes on the local version, ready to be filled with data, code, and figures.

Author: no diff here too...

> On the other hand, the tonic application will also be able to add submodules and folders to the parent repository for each experiment performed. A data submodule will be created, so that the data can be curated and published independently of the other experiments, while other folders will be created (). A synchronisation of the computer version will then bring these changes on the local version, ready to be filled with data, code, and figures.

Author: ```suggestion
On the other hand, the tonic application will also be able to add submodules and folders to the parent repository for each experiment performed. A data submodule will be created, so that the data can be curated and published independently of the other experiments, while other folders will be created (). A synchronisation of the computer version will then bring these changes on the local version, ready to be filled with data, code, and figures.
```

Last but not least, the parent repository will come with a synchronization script that will make these synchronisation as easy as a double click. Users with git knowledge will be able to create their own workflow, as git and git annex are still the background of this technology.

> 

Author: ```suggestion
Besides the GIN-tonic tooling we currently also implement this concept for GitLab-based plattforms, called Lab-tonic.
```

> 

Reviewer 2: Besides the GIN-tonic tooling we currently also implement this concept for GitLab-based plattforms, called Lab-tonic.

---

> title: "Towards a standardized research folder structure."

Reviewer 3: Remove (.) on end. Title capitalisation style guide says all words here except the article a should be uppercase. Although you might be leaving this to the Citation Style Language to do this for you?  https://www.prospercircle.org/tools/title-capitalization?style=Chicago

bibliography:  "GIN-tonic-paper-zotero.bib"
author:
  - Julien Colomb
  - Thorsten Arendt
  - Keisuke Sehara
  - The Gin-tonic team
output: 
  bookdown::html_document2:
    keep_md: true
---

> ![titleimage: Some positive feedback received in the survey.](../50_figures/pulication_ready_figures/blogtitle.jpeg)

Reviewer 3: Re: image blogtitle.jpeg - Replace using with use; remove space before? at end. Bubble text left: use it's. Bubble text middle: replace is worth with saves; remove (.) period on end. Bubble text right: Last line change to - put lots of work into planning at the start

> # Summary

Reviewer 3: Summary - overall. I think you need a line in the summary on the USP of Gin-Tonic to hook readers and incentivise them. It could be a single short sentence that describes the submodule sharing feature.

Author: Is the new version better?

> In contrast to software developers, researchers mostly do not organize their files according to some common standard.

Reviewer 3: don't

While data managers propose to design and follow such an organisation,

> they fail at providing clear recommendations or examples;

Reviewer 3: to researchers

and there is no time specifically assigned to this task in the researcher's work.
We believe that **providing researchers with a commonly accepted folder tree structure template** could make a huge difference in promoting data management and facilitating research collaboration.

> In this blog, we present the results of an initial survey run in three neuroscientific research consortia ([CRC1315](https://www.biologie.hu-berlin.de/en/gruppenseiten-en/sfb1315), [CRC1158](www.sfb1158.de

Reviewer 3: The CRC acronym needs expanding, or some explanation given for researchers no from this field to know what is being talked about here.

> ), [CRC135](http://www.allpsych.uni-giessen.de/sfb/)), including a presentation of a new folder structure and its technical **implementation in the GIN-tonic application**.

Reviewer 3: I would strongly recommend using a capital on Tonic as its a proper noun and when on its own, as it will be used some time, it will be difficult for the reader to spot. It is a style choice, so discretionary - but I find its important to use a Capital on proper names. :-)

> Researchers from all research domains are now invited to review this draft in a second survey (run until mid January 2021, LINK).  

Reviewer 3: take off the () brackets and add which runs. Change to mid-January.

# Introduction

Every day, researchers spend time doing file management on their computers (creating, downloading, naming, moving, saving, copying, reviewing, navigating, searching for, sharing, and deleting files and folders).

> While many different initiatives and tools have tried to improve file management (using tags, databases and search algorithms), the use of folder tree structure appeared to be unavoidable and necessary [@dinneenUbiquitousDigitalFile2020].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While many different initiatives and tools have tried to improve file management (using tags, databases and search algorithms), the use of a folder tree structure appeared to be unavoidable and necessary [@dinneenUbiquitousDigitalFile2020].
```

In addition, both proponents of reproducible research and data management experts recommend researchers the use of an appropriate folder organizational structure ([@LibraryCarpentryLcfairresearch2019], [@theturingwaycommunityTuringWayHandbook2019]).

> However, only few actually provide examples or did attempt to bring uniformity in such structures (see [@vuorreSharingOrganizingResearch2020] and [@wilsonGoodEnoughPractices2017] for exceptions).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, only few actually provide examples or attempt to bring uniformity in such structures (see [@vuorreSharingOrganizingResearch2020] and [@wilsonGoodEnoughPractices2017] for exceptions).
```

We -the authors of this blog post- are data managers of different institutions working with neurobiologists, and we teamed up with the NFDI Neuroscience community to develop a new strategy to support researchers with their data management.
We hypothesize that implementing a hierarchical directory structure using a template could help researchers collaborate on their projects,
and manage their data and files better.

In a first step, 
We collected the feedback from 51 neuroscientists presented with two initial template drafts (see Fig. 1),
analyzed their responses,
and built an updated template (see Fig. 4 and https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3987767 to download the templates).

> This new template takes three levels of projects organization into account (laboratory, project, and experiment),

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This new template takes three levels of organization into account (laboratory, project, and experiment),
```

while staying fairly simple and flexible.
This blog ends by outlining the GIN-tonic application, that brings some technical solution (based on the git submodule technology) to add flexibility and ease of use to the template.

# The survey

## Two template structures

In order to obtain a practical flair in comments and feedback received,
we provided two templates, both having a similar number of folders,

> but organized differently.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
but organized differently. The templates were obtained by analyzing current research workflows discussed during a number of interviews with researchers of the involved consortia.
```

> The 5_top template represented a more hierarchical structure,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The **_5_top_** template represented a more hierarchical structure,
```

> while the 9_top template represented a more flat structure (see Fig. 1).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
while the **_9_top_** template represented a more flat structure (see Fig. 1).
```

Then, we asked researchers to browse the folder tree while asking them to place or find specific files,

> hoping researchers will make themselves familiar with the template before giving us thier feedback. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
hoping researchers will make themselves familiar with the template before giving us their feedback. 
```

> ![Fig 1: the two templates structure](../50_figures/pulication_ready_figures/2draft-templates.png)

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't the figures have captions? I see there is one, but it is not in the rendered form...

> ## No clear preference for one or the other template. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Support for both templates. 
```

Author: Veto is negative...

> We ran the survey on the three involved CRCs during Autumn 2020 (using the lime survey application) and finally got 51 responses.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We ran the survey on the three involved CRCs during autumn 2020 (using the lime survey application) and finally got 51 responses.
```

In the meantime, we prepared the analysis code using fake data. The analysis was run on the final data to produce a reproducible report.
In general, researchers reacted very positively to our project.
Surprisingly, about half of the participants preferred one template, while the other half preferred the other one (see Fig. 2,
participants had to choose one or the other template).
This preference was highly correlated with the similarity of the template to the structure they currently use (Pearson Chi-square, p−value = 2.23e−06, no correction for multitple tests was performed).
However, we could not identify any notable effect of career stage or research domain on this preference,
or any effect of this preference on willingness to use such a template.
In particular, computer scientists did not seem to differ from wet-lab researchers in these aspects.

> ![Fig. 2: Wilingness to use a template, split by preference for one template.](../50_figures/pulication_ready_figures/fig2.png)

Reviewer 2: Again: caption?

We asked three questions about where they would save or search for specific documents in the different structures.
Researchers were indicating different folders, and few chose the folder we designed for that data,
showing that **a too detailed folder structure seems to be rather inconvenient*.
On the other hand, researchers would navigate the repository to find specific files using similar strategies (see Fig. 3),
suggesting that having a structure can be helpful, and may reduce the time to browse for specific information.

![Fig.3: Order of folder choice, when researchers would search for information about the "blindness" status of the experiment design. When picking a folder as their first to fifth choice (y axis), researchers would mostly choose the main readme file or the preregistration folder first, while the majority of them would in the primary data or analysis folder last.](../50_figures/pulication_ready_figures/fig3.png)

## Issues

> Most participants could see the advantages of having a standardized structure for their files,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Most participants see the advantages of having a standardized structure for their files,
```

Many mentioned that it would only reach full impact if the whole lab would be using it, emphasizing the advantage of such a system for
collaborative work.
In addition, they mentioned the time saved by not having to create a template for themselves,
but only use an existing standard.
While they were quite unanimous about using a template for new projects, they were skeptical about making a transition for ongoing projects,
as the cost of transition might be too high.
More generally, they were worried that learning a new workflow to use the template could be time consuming.

In many cases, people mentioned that the **files are organized via experiments**, not at the project level.
In particular, people tend to pool data and code in a single experiment folder.
This is reminiscent of the two example structures given in the library carpentry course [@LibraryCarpentryLcfairresearch2019].

On the other hand, some **files are organized outside of project folders**, that is in particular places irrespective of the project they belong to. 
Many researchers reported having a folder for all conference reports or all manuscripts, for instance.

> # The new template

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# The revised template
```

## Template overview

Data management principles recommend (1) to keep all files related to a project in a single folder (this facilitates sharing of these files with the whole team working on the project, for instance),

> and (2) to manage data and code differently (this allows different version control system, as well as independent sharing and reusing of data and code).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and (2) to manage data and code differently (this allows different version control systems, as well as independent sharing and reusing of data and code).
```

> We designed a template that follows these principles, 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We finally designed a template that follows these principles, 
```

but added some recommendations and technical solutions 
in order to permit users to have laboratory and experiment-level organization of their files, nevertheless.

> ![Fig.4: Folder structure developed after analyzing the survey. The template works mostly on the project level (one unique folder for all files related to one project). The experiment level is taken care by specifying several experiment sub-folders when new experiments are started. By sharing specific subfolder independently in a cloud solution, one can reorganize information in cross-project directories that host sub-folders coming from different projects. Note that both the creation of experiment sub-folders and the creation of laboratory level organization is automated in GIN-tonic.](../50_figures/pulication_ready_figures/fig4.png)

Reviewer 2: I like the structure and the figure!
Again: Caption...

```{}

> Our definition of the organisation levels:

Reviewer 2: I would use the same order as in the figure as well as in the following paragraphs: experiment, project, laboratory

Author: this was following one of your change in version 2 :), I will get it back to that order.

> - Research project: The unit of research that address a specific research question. It can mostly be deliminated by the team involved and typically produce a unique research paper.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Research project: The unit of research that address a specific research question. It can mostly be deliminated by the team involved and typically produces a unique research paper.
```

> - Experiment: The unit of research involving a statistically dependent datasets that are analysed together. I mostly produce one figure. Different experiments typically involve different methods, or different samples, and could be ending in different publications. 

Reviewer 2: "I mostly produce one figure." => I do not understand this...

> - Experiment: The unit of research involving a statistically dependent datasets that are analysed together. I mostly produce one figure. Different experiments typically involve different methods, or different samples, and could be ending in different publications. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Experiment: The unit of research involving statistically dependent datasets that are analysed together. I mostly produce one figure. Different experiments typically involve different methods, or different samples, and could end in different publications. 
```

> - Laboratory: Any organization that involves files from several projects. It can also be for a unique researchers, or for a consortium of laboratories.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Laboratory: Any organization that involves files from several projects. It can also be for a unique researcher, or for a consortium of laboratories.
```

The expected use case is different though, and we expect some users to have certain files organized by projects and other users having the same files organised by file type. This requires to share sub-folders independently and set the different instance of these sub-folders to be linked together. This is pretty complex to set up using common cloud technology (dropbox-like) that cannot be easily automated. As explained below, the open source GIN-tonic tool allows to set it up automatically, using the git submodule technology.

## GIN-tonic implementation

GIN is the G-Node infrastructure.
It is based on gogs, git and git annex technologies and
 brings non only most of the project management and coordination tools that made the success of open source software development,
but also large file support and data publication.
It is compatible with the git submodule technology, where sub-folders can be synchronized, shared and published independently of the other sub-folders,
while looking completely normal on one's computer.

> GIN brings therefore the possibility to publish sub-modules independently of each others, 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
GIN brings therefore the possibility to publish submodules independently of each others, 
```

> GIN brings therefore the possibility to publish sub-modules independently of each others, 

Reviewer 2: We should be consistent: sub-modules vs. submodules, sub-folder vs. subfolder

Author: agree, I would go for the version with "-"

Author: finally checked via google, and will use  submodule and subfolder (next commit)

which will ease the opening of research data.

> It might also make [the use of markdown and latex to write manuscripts](https://oa-pub.hos.tuhh.de/en/project/) a straightforward choice, as these technologies can use git as a version control system.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It might also make [the use of markdown and LaTex to write manuscripts](https://oa-pub.hos.tuhh.de/en/project/) a straightforward choice, as these technologies can use git as a version control system.
```

> We are building an extension that will facilitate some administrative tasks and automate some complex work-flows linked to the use of the template.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We are building an extension that will facilitate some administrative tasks and automate some complex workflows linked to the use of the template.
```

We could not resist calling it tonic, in reference to the vigor added to the GIN tool. The tonic tool is still in development, and we we are also working on the implementation of the tonic concept for GitLab-based platforms (that is, using git and git-LFS), called LAB-tonic. 

  

The tonic application creates a new project repository,

> cloning the research folder structure (with some folders being created as sub-modules), and adding a script that will synchronize the repository and its sub-modules on a double click. It also adds some submodules (shared-figures, manuscripts, and report_conf) to loboratory-wide repositories, automatically allowing laboratory level organisation of some files.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
clones the research folder structure (with some folders being created as submodules), and adds a script that will synchronize the repository and its submodules on a double click. It also adds some submodules (shared_figures, manuscripts, and report_conf) to loboratory-wide repositories, automatically allowing laboratory level organisation of some files.
```

This means that for example a manuscript draft can be available in the project folder on the student computer, while the same data will be available in the lab_manuscript folder on the PI computer, both version being synchronized with a unique version on the GIN server. 

> On the other hand, the tonic application will also be able to add submodules and folders to the parent repository. For each experiment performed, a data submodule  will be created, so that the data can be curated and published independently of the other experiments, while other normal folders will be created (see Fig. 4). A synchronisation of the computer version will then bring these changes on the local version, showing the new folders ready to be filled with data, code, and figures.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In addition, the tonic application will also be able to add submodules and folders to the parent repository. For each experiment performed, a data submodule  will be created, so that the data can be curated and published independently of the other experiments, while other normal folders will be created (see Fig. 4). A synchronisation of the computer version will then bring these changes on the local version, showing the new folders ready to be filled with data, code, and figures.
```

# Conclusion

We hope to provide the research community with a useful project folder structure template. 
A second survey will tell us how wide it could be applied, and whether domain specific templates may be needed.

> The template will get its full power when used inside the gin-tonic application.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The template will get its full power when used inside the GIN-tonic application.
```

## The project and cross-project level

We propose to mirror some folders (for shared figures, report and conference, and manuscripts) both in the project folder and in a different folder (fig. 4). In addition, we would propose to add a `labcommons` folder that could be shared and synchronised between all lab members using cloud technologies. This will be quite difficult to set manually (using alias folders for example), but using git submodule technology in gin tonic, it can be automated (see below).

![Fig.4: Folder structure developed after analysing the survey. The purple point and arrows indicates that these folders are mirrored in different folder structures (using the gi submodule technology). One can for instance access (and update) the same files looking in the project manuscript folder, or by navigating to the manuscripts folder, and then to the project. For each experiments, additional folders will be created automatically in different folders.](../50_figures/pulication_ready_figures/fig4.png)

# Gin-tonic implementation

> 

Reviewer: # Automated project management: Gin-tonic

The major challenge in sharing a common project structure is about maintaining the individual project repositories to be well-formed. As the project develops, the common structure can become easily broken by researchers adding _ad hoc_ temporally folders, without knowing where the files should belong to. It takes lots of time and effort, from both researchers and data curators alike, to remember and follow the rules in individual specific cases of adding files and folders.

To alleviate the cost of maintaining the project structure, here we propose an automated way of managing the development of project.

Author: As sugestion above
